+++
title = "The story of one subtle optimization"
date = 2013-02-24 
draft = false
tags = ["python", "optimization"]
+++

In my previous job I worked on a web-service that was passing JSON payloads between workers using the
[Gearman](http://gearman.org) task queue. One day I was trying to figure out why it took such a long
time (a few seconds) to transfer a 3-megabyte JSON value. I was sure that it was a problem in our code.
To my surprise, the profiler showed that the bottleneck was in this function of
[python-gearman](https://github.com/Yelp/python-gearman/) client library:

```python
 def read_data_from_socket(self, bytes_to_read=4096):
     """Reads data from socket --> buffer"""

     if not self.connected:
         self.throw_exception(message='disconnected')

     recv_buffer = ''
     try:
         recv_buffer = self.gearman_socket.recv(bytes_to_read)
     except socket.error, socket_exception:
         self.throw_exception(exception=socket_exception)

     if len(recv_buffer) == 0:
         self.throw_exception(message='remote disconnected')

     self._incoming_buffer += recv_buffer
     return len(self._incoming_buffer)
```

The problem is in the line `self._incoming_buffer += recv_buffer` where the `_incoming_buffer`
instance variable has the type `str`. I was taught that it is a bad idea to do repeated
string concatenations in a programming language where strings are immutable. So I wrote
a small snippet to find out how slow it really was:

```python
def f():
    spam = ''
    eggs = 'a' * 4096

    for i in xrange(1000):
        spam += eggs
```

The `timeit.timeit()` function showed that it took less than **1 ms** to call the function `f()`
that performed 1000 string concatenation operations. That was really amazing. I started to think
that I was missing something. So I tried running the following snippet instead:

```python
def g():
    class Foo:
        def __init__(self):
            self.spam = ''

    eggs = 'a' * 4096

    f = Foo()
    for i in xrange(1000):
        f.spam += eggs
```

It took about 450 ms — that's much "better" (or, rather, closer to my expectations)!
So what the heck? These two functions are almost identical, except that the latter uses
an instance attribute instead of a simple variable.

The bytecode comparison of these two function didn't show anything interesting: the for-loop
is completely the same except that the function `g()` uses the `LOAD_ATTR`/`STORE_ATTR` bytecodes
instead of `LOAD_FAST`/`STORE_FAST`. But how can attribute access be so slow? It surely
must not be a bottleneck while concatenating strings in a loop.

Another interesting thing was that it took the same amount of time (about 1.6 s) to execute both
`f()` and `g()` functions using the [PyPy](http://pypy.org/) interpreter.

Now I was almost sure that [CPython](http://python.org/) had some kind of optimization that
allowed it to execute the `f()` function so fast. But the second question, why it didn't work
for the `g()` function, remained.  Running `python` with strace showed that executing the
`g()` function required almost 100x more memory allocations than executing the `f()`
function. The time came to debug the interpreter using gdb. That allowed me to identify
the CPython function which performs string concatenations.

The source code of `string_concatenate()` function had a few interesting lines:

```c
 if (v->ob_refcnt == 1 && !PyString_CHECK_INTERNED(v)) {
    /* Now we own the last reference to 'v', so we can resize it
     * in-place.
     */
    if (_PyString_Resize(&v, new_len) != 0) {
        /* XXX if _PyString_Resize() fails, 'v' has been
         * deallocated so it cannot be put back into
         * 'variable'.  The MemoryError is raised when there
         * is no value in 'variable', which might (very
         * remotely) be a cause of incompatibilities.
         */
        return NULL;
    }
    /* copy 'w' into the newly allocated area of 'v' */
    memcpy(PyString_AS_STRING(v) + v_len,
           PyString_AS_STRING(w), w_len);
    return v;
}
else {
    /* When in-place resizing is not an option. */
    PyString_Concat(&v, w);
    return v;
}
```

So-so, strings actually **can** be mutable! This allows to resize ones in-place that makes strings
concatenation very fast. But there is a strict constraint - there must be **at most** 1 reference
to the string to be resized (otherwise the language contract that strings are immutable would be
broken).

It's important to understand that this is only a CPython-specific optimization, and you'd better
not take benefit of it in your code! Everyone knows that string concatenation in Python is
a bad idea, so why to change our mind? If you really need to construct a string this way you should
read the docs for [str.join()](http://docs.python.org/2/library/stdtypes.html#str.join>)
method, [StringIO](http://docs.python.org/2/library/stringio.html) and
[array](http://docs.python.org/2/library/array.html) modules first - this is the way to write
code that works efficiently in all Python interpreters.

**P. S.** I wrote a small patch for python-gearman
that uses an `array` type for handling incoming data which greatly improves performance.
The patch was accepted in the **master** branch. Everyone who is interested in using Gearman
task queue in Python programs might want to check it out.
